docs/rootdoc.md, before:

# EMQX Configuration

EMQX configuration files are in [HOCON](https://github.com/emqx/hocon) format.
HOCON, or Human-Optimized Config Object Notation is a format for human-readable data,
and a superset of JSON.

## Layered

EMQX configuration consists of two layers.
From bottom up:

1. Cluster-synced configs: `$EMQX_NODE__DATA_DIR/configs/cluster.hocon`.
2. Local node configs: `emqx.conf` + `EMQX_` prefixed environment variables.

:::tip Tip
Prior to v5.0.23 and e5.0.3, the cluster-synced configs are stored in
`cluster-override.conf` which is applied on top of the local configs.

If upgraded from an earlier version, as long as `cluster-override.conf` exists,
`cluster.hocon` will not be created, and `cluster-override.conf` will stay on
top of the overriding layers.
:::

When environment variable `$EMQX_NODE__DATA_DIR` is not set, config `node.data_dir`
is used.

The `cluster.hocon` file is overwritten at runtime when changes
are made from Dashboard, management HTTP API, or CLI. When clustered,
after EMQX restarts, it copies the file from the node which has the greatest `uptime`.

:::tip Tip
To avoid confusion, don't add the same keys in both `cluster.hocon` and `emqx.conf`.
:::

For detailed override rules, see 'Config Overlay Rules' below.

## Syntax

In config file the values can be notated as JSON like objects, such as
```
node {
    name = "emqx@127.0.0.1"
    cookie = "mysecret"
}
```

Another equivalent representation is flat, such as

```
node.name = "127.0.0.1"
node.cookie = "mysecret"
```

This flat format is almost backward compatible with EMQX's config file format
in 4.x series (the so called 'cuttlefish' format).

It is not fully compatible because the often HOCON requires strings to be quoted,
while cuttlefish treats all characters to the right of the `=` mark as the value.

e.g. cuttlefish: `node.name = emqx@127.0.0.1`, HOCON: `node.name = "emqx@127.0.0.1"`.

Strings without special characters in them can be unquoted in HOCON too,
e.g. `foo`, `foo_bar` and `foo_bar_1`.

For more HOCON syntax, please refer to the [specification](https://github.com/lightbend/config/blob/main/HOCON.md)

## Schema

To make the HOCON objects type-safe, EMQX introduced a schema for it.
The schema defines data types, and data fields' names and metadata for config value validation
and more.

::: tip Tip
The configuration document you are reading now is generated from schema metadata.
:::

### Complex Data Types

There are 4 complex data types in EMQX's HOCON config:

1. Struct: Named using an unquoted string, followed by a predefined list of fields.
   Only lowercase letters and digits are allowed in struct and field names.
   Alos, only underscore can be used as word separator.
1. Map: Map is like Struct, however the fields are not predefined.
1. Union: `MemberType1 | MemberType2 | ...`
1. Array: `[ElementType]`

::: tip Tip
If map filed name is a positive integer number, it is interpreted as an alternative representation of an `Array`.
For example:
```
myarray.1 = 74
myarray.2 = 75
```
will be interpreated as `myarray = [74, 75]`, which is handy when trying to override array elements.
:::

### Primitive Data Types

Complex types define data 'boxes' which may contain other complex data
or primitive values.
There are quite some different primitive types, to name a few:

* `atom()`.
* `boolean()`.
* `string()`.
* `integer()`.
* `float()`.
* `number()`.
* `binary()`, another format of string().
* `emqx_schema:duration()`, time duration, another format of integer()
* ...

::: tip Tip
The primitive types are mostly self-describing, so there is usually not a lot to document.
For types that are not so clear by their names, the field description is to be used to find the details.
:::

### Config Paths

If we consider the whole EMQX config as a tree,
to reference a primitive value, we can use a dot-separated names form string for
the path from the tree-root (always a Struct) down to the primitive values at tree-leaves.

Each segment of the dotted string is a Struct filed name or Map key.
For Array elements, 1-based index is used.

below are some examples

```
node.name = "emqx.127.0.0.1"
zone.zone1.max_packet_size = "10M"
authentication.1.enable = true
```

### Environment variables

Environment variables can be used to define or override config values.

Due to the fact that dots (`.`) are not allowed in environment variables, dots are
replaced with double-underscores (`__`).

And the `EMQX_` prefix is used as the namespace.

For example `node.name` can be represented as `EMQX_NODE__NAME`

Environment variable values are parsed as HOCON values, this allows users
to even set complex values from environment variables.

For example, this environment variable sets an array value.

```
export EMQX_LISTENERS__SSL__L1__AUTHENTICATION__SSL__CIPHERS='["TLS_AES_256_GCM_SHA384"]'
```
However, this also means a string value should be quoted if it happens to contain special
characters such as `=` and `:`.

For example, a string value `"localhost:1883"` would be
parsed into object (struct): `{"localhost": 1883}`.

To keep it as a string, one should quote the value like below:

```
EMQX_BRIDGES__MQTT__MYBRIDGE__CONNECTOR_SERVER='"localhost:1883"'
```

::: tip Tip
Unknown root paths are silently discarded by EMQX, for example `EMQX_UNKNOWN_ROOT__FOOBAR` is
silently discarded because `unknown_root` is not a predefined root path.

Unknown field names in environment variables are logged as a `warning` level log, for example:

```
[warning] unknown_env_vars: ["EMQX_AUTHENTICATION__ENABLED"]
```

because the field name is `enable`, not `enabled`.
:::


### Config Overlay Rules

HOCON objects are overlaid, in general:

- Within one file, objects defined 'later' recursively override objects defined 'earlier'
- When layered, 'later' (higher layer) objects override objects defined 'earlier' (lower layer)

Below are more detailed rules.

#### Struct Fields

Later config values overwrites earlier values.
For example, in below config, the last line `debug` overwrites `error` for
console log handler's `level` config, but leaving `enable` unchanged.
```
log {
    console_handler{
        enable=true,
        level=error
    }
}

## ... more configs ...

log.console_handler.level=debug
```

#### Map Values

Maps are like structs, only the files are user-defined rather than
the config schema. For instance, `zone1` in the example below.

```
zone {
    zone1 {
        mqtt.max_packet_size = 1M
    }
}

## The maximum packet size can be defined as above,
## then overridden as below

zone.zone1.mqtt.max_packet_size = 10M
```

#### Array Elements

Arrays in EMQX config have two different representations

* list, such as: `[1, 2, 3]`
* indexed-map, such as: `{"1"=1, "2"=2, "3"=3}`

Dot-separated paths with number in it are parsed to indexed-maps
e.g. `authentication.1={...}` is parsed as `authentication={"1": {...}}`

This feature makes it easy to override array element values. For example:

```
authentication=[{enable=true, backend="built_in_database", mechanism="password_based"}]
# we can disable this authentication provider with:
authentication.1.enable=false
```

::: tip Tip
List arrays is a full-array override, but not a recursive merge, into indexed-map arrays.
e.g.

```
authentication=[{enable=true, backend="built_in_database", mechanism="password_based"}]
## below value will replace the whole array, but not to override just one field.
authentication=[{enable=true}]
```
:::

Commit message:

Update rootdoc, remove zone configs from examples

docs/rootdoc.md, after:

# EMQX Configuration

EMQX configuration files are in [HOCON](https://github.com/emqx/hocon) format.
HOCON, or Human-Optimized Config Object Notation is a format for human-readable data,
and a superset of JSON.

## Layered

EMQX configuration consists of two layers.
From bottom up:

1. Cluster-synced configs: `$EMQX_NODE__DATA_DIR/configs/cluster.hocon`.
2. Local node configs: `emqx.conf` + `EMQX_` prefixed environment variables.

:::tip Tip
Prior to v5.0.23 and e5.0.3, the cluster-synced configs are stored in
`cluster-override.conf` which is applied on top of the local configs.

If upgraded from an earlier version, as long as `cluster-override.conf` exists,
`cluster.hocon` will not be created, and `cluster-override.conf` will stay on
top of the overriding layers.
:::

When environment variable `$EMQX_NODE__DATA_DIR` is not set, config `node.data_dir`
is used.

The `cluster.hocon` file is overwritten at runtime when changes
are made from Dashboard, management HTTP API, or CLI. When clustered,
after EMQX restarts, it copies the file from the node which has the greatest `uptime`.

:::tip Tip
To avoid confusion, don't add the same keys in both `cluster.hocon` and `emqx.conf`.
:::

For detailed override rules, see 'Config Overlay Rules' below.

## Syntax

In config file the values can be notated as JSON like objects, such as
```
node {
    name = "emqx@127.0.0.1"
    cookie = "mysecret"
}
```

Another equivalent representation is flat, such as

```
node.name = "127.0.0.1"
node.cookie = "mysecret"
```

This flat format is almost backward compatible with EMQX's config file format
in 4.x series (the so called 'cuttlefish' format).

It is not fully compatible because the often HOCON requires strings to be quoted,
while cuttlefish treats all characters to the right of the `=` mark as the value.

e.g. cuttlefish: `node.name = emqx@127.0.0.1`, HOCON: `node.name = "emqx@127.0.0.1"`.

Strings without special characters in them can be unquoted in HOCON too,
e.g. `foo`, `foo_bar` and `foo_bar_1`.

For more HOCON syntax, please refer to the [specification](https://github.com/lightbend/config/blob/main/HOCON.md)

## Schema

To make the HOCON objects type-safe, EMQX introduced a schema for it.
The schema defines data types, and data fields' names and metadata for config value validation
and more.

::: tip Tip
The configuration document you are reading now is generated from schema metadata.
:::

### Complex Data Types

There are 4 complex data types in EMQX's HOCON config:

1. Struct: Named using an unquoted string, followed by a predefined list of fields.
   Only lowercase letters and digits are allowed in struct and field names.
   Alos, only underscore can be used as word separator.
1. Map: Map is like Struct, however the fields are not predefined.
1. Union: `MemberType1 | MemberType2 | ...`
1. Array: `[ElementType]`

::: tip Tip
If map filed name is a positive integer number, it is interpreted as an alternative representation of an `Array`.
For example:
```
myarray.1 = 74
myarray.2 = 75
```
will be interpreated as `myarray = [74, 75]`, which is handy when trying to override array elements.
:::

### Primitive Data Types

Complex types define data 'boxes' which may contain other complex data
or primitive values.
There are quite some different primitive types, to name a few:

* `atom()`.
* `boolean()`.
* `string()`.
* `integer()`.
* `float()`.
* `number()`.
* `binary()`, another format of string().
* `emqx_schema:duration()`, time duration, another format of integer()
* ...

::: tip Tip
The primitive types are mostly self-describing, so there is usually not a lot to document.
For types that are not so clear by their names, the field description is to be used to find the details.
:::

### Config Paths

If we consider the whole EMQX config as a tree,
to reference a primitive value, we can use a dot-separated names form string for
the path from the tree-root (always a Struct) down to the primitive values at tree-leaves.

Each segment of the dotted string is a Struct filed name or Map key.
For Array elements, 1-based index is used.

below are some examples

```
node.name = "emqx.127.0.0.1"
authentication.1.enable = true
```

### Environment variables

Environment variables can be used to define or override config values.

Due to the fact that dots (`.`) are not allowed in environment variables, dots are
replaced with double-underscores (`__`).

And the `EMQX_` prefix is used as the namespace.

For example `node.name` can be represented as `EMQX_NODE__NAME`

Environment variable values are parsed as HOCON values, this allows users
to even set complex values from environment variables.

For example, this environment variable sets an array value.

```
export EMQX_LISTENERS__SSL__L1__AUTHENTICATION__SSL__CIPHERS='["TLS_AES_256_GCM_SHA384"]'
```
However, this also means a string value should be quoted if it happens to contain special
characters such as `=` and `:`.

For example, a string value `"localhost:1883"` would be
parsed into object (struct): `{"localhost": 1883}`.

To keep it as a string, one should quote the value like below:

```
EMQX_BRIDGES__MQTT__MYBRIDGE__CONNECTOR_SERVER='"localhost:1883"'
```

::: tip Tip
Unknown root paths are silently discarded by EMQX, for example `EMQX_UNKNOWN_ROOT__FOOBAR` is
silently discarded because `unknown_root` is not a predefined root path.

Unknown field names in environment variables are logged as a `warning` level log, for example:

```
[warning] unknown_env_vars: ["EMQX_AUTHENTICATION__ENABLED"]
```

because the field name is `enable`, not `enabled`.
:::


### Config Overlay Rules

HOCON objects are overlaid, in general:

- Within one file, objects defined 'later' recursively override objects defined 'earlier'
- When layered, 'later' (higher layer) objects override objects defined 'earlier' (lower layer)

Below are more detailed rules.

#### Struct Fields

Later config values overwrites earlier values.
For example, in below config, the last line `debug` overwrites `error` for
console log handler's `level` config, but leaving `enable` unchanged.
```
log {
    console_handler{
        enable=true,
        level=error
    }
}

## ... more configs ...

log.console_handler.level=debug
```

#### Map Values

Maps are like structs, only the fields are user-defined rather than the config schema.
For instance, HTTP headers in the example below.

```
authentication = [
    {
        enable = true
        mechanism = password_based
        backend = http
        method = post
        url = "http://localhost:8080"
        headers {
            "content-type" = "application/json"
            "connection" = "keep-alive"
        }
    }
]

```

::: tip Tip
Map keys cannot have dots.
e.g. `content-type` is a valid map key, but `some.other.name` is not.
:::

#### Array Elements

Arrays in EMQX config have two different representations

* list, such as: `[1, 2, 3]`
* indexed-map, such as: `{"1"=1, "2"=2, "3"=3}`

Dot-separated paths with number in it are parsed to indexed-maps
e.g. `authentication.1={...}` is parsed as `authentication={"1": {...}}`

This feature makes it easy to override array element values. For example:

```
authentication=[{enable=true, backend="built_in_database", mechanism="password_based"}]
# we can disable this authentication provider with:
authentication.1.enable=false
```

::: tip Tip
List arrays is a full-array override, but not a recursive merge, into indexed-map arrays.
e.g.

```
authentication=[{enable=true, backend="built_in_database", mechanism="password_based"}]
## below value will replace the whole array, but not to override just one field.
authentication=[{enable=true}]
```
:::
